% River networks dampen long-term hydrological signals of climate change
% K.A. Chezik^1^\*, S.C. Anderson^2^, J.W. Moore^1^

^1^Earth to Ocean Research Group, Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Dr., Burnaby, British Columbia V5A 1S6, Canada ^2^School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, Box 355020, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

**Climate change is dramatically altering temperate rivers --- snow-melt is earlier[@Rauscher:2008], floods are more frequent[@Hirabayashi:2013], and low flows are more persistent[@McCabe:2014]. Here we describe a novel pathway by which large free-flowing rivers dampen local hydrologic climate change by aggregating a diverse climate portfolio with variable upstream climate signals. We examine this hypothesis using flow trend estimates (1970--2007) calculated at 55 hydro-metric gauge stations within the vast Fraser River watershed in British Columbia, Canada. The Fraser River dampened variability in downstream long-term median discharge by 95% from between -6 and 18% per-decade among small watersheds to between 0.8 and 1.6% per-decade near the confluence. A null model approach indicated that dampening of annual median flow trends within the Fraser River was typically 5.4 times greater than would be expected of a watershed exhibiting a consistent basin-wide climate response. Although climate dampening strength varied seasonally, our findings indicate that large free-flowing rivers offer a powerful and largely unappreciated process of climate change mitigation. River networks that integrate a diverse climate portfolio can dampen local extremes and offer climate relief to riverine biota.**

As billions are spent adapting to climate change by such means as building dikes or improving stormwater drainage[@Narain:2011], certain habitats and processes provide a natural defense system that mitigates climate change impacts[@Jones:2012]. For example, coastal habitats such as oyster reefs, mangrove forests, and eelgrass beds shield 67% of the United States coastline and 1.4 million people from sea level rise and storms[@Arkema:2013]. Protection and enhancement of these natural systems has become a key component of many climate mitigation strategies[@Guerry:2015], as they return multiple cost-effective services in contrast to engineered alternatives[@Jones:2012]. For instance, revitalization of the Mississippi delta not only improves storm protection, but also increases production and sustainability of fisheries and wildlife resources, protects the water supply, and reduces the impact of wastewater effluent[@Conservation:1998]. The value of climate buffering habitats stands only to increase as average global temperatures climb. Recent international agreements in Paris aim to limit global temperature rise to 1.5$\degree$C[@Hulme:2016], a goal that concedes a minimum doubling of observed warming[@Hartmann:2013]; therefore, an urgent challenge and opportunity is discovering systems that naturally buffer against oncoming impacts of climate change.

River systems may offer an unappreciated defense against some aspects of climate change. Climate change is altering global precipitation patterns[@Donat:2016] and subsequently river flow regimes[@Hartmann:2013;@Palmer:2009]. Earlier snowmelt, reduced snow pack, shifts from snow to rain, and changes in the annual distribution of precipitation are all impacting stream flow[@Hartmann:2013], resulting in flashier flows, longer periods of drought and critically low flows for wildlife and agriculture[@Melillo:2014]. However, we hypothesize that large free-flowing river networks may naturally dampen these signals of climate change by integrating across different manifestations of climate. Processes that aggregate across asynchronous components tend to dampen the aggregate, a process known as the portfolio effect[@Doak:1998]. Climate is expressed differently and asynchronously over the landscape[@George:2015] and on account of their branching architecture and directional flow, river networks directionally integrate these varied climate manifestations[@Peterson:2013], potentially dampening the local climatic response of sub-catchments. Large free-flowing rivers may have diverse climate portfolios, with sub-catchments acting as assets in their portfolio, thereby dampening local climate impacts. Portfolio effects in rivers are already known to dampen short-term variation[@Moore:2014b; @Yeakel:2014] but attenuation of long-term climate driven shifts have yet to be examined.

Here we examine whether rivers attenuate local long-term climate change through analyses of hydrometric data from one of the largest free-flowing rivers in North America. Located in British Columbia, Canada, the Fraser River drains an area approximately the size of the United Kingdom (~217,000 km^2^) and in a rare combination is fairly well monitored while also having no dams on its main stem[@Vorosmarty:2010] (Fig. 1). This watershed drains interior high plateau, coastal mountains, and the Canadian Rockies, and thus integrates a diverse mosaic of landscapes, weather, and climate. As with other mid-latitude rivers[@Bindoff:2013], the Fraser River has expressed increasing trends in discharge volume and variability over the last several decades[@Dery:2012; @Morrison:2002]. The river's discharge is monitored by hydro-metric gauge stations throughout the watershed. We analyzed 38 years of data collected concurrently at 55 of these stations and applied a novel analytical approach to examine whether this large river exhibits signals of long-term climate dampening.

We focused on signals of climate change in hydrology at locations within the Fraser River basin. As climate change alters precipitation patterns from snow to rain in temperate regions, rivers are generally predicted to have lower low-flows and higher high-flows, as well as earlier snowmelt[@Nijssen:2001]. These manifestations of rising temperatures are impacting species[@Xenopoulos:2006] and people[@Hirabayashi:2013]. Extracting annual and monthly metrics of flow from gauge station records, we used maximum- and minimum-flow estimates to capture trends in extreme discharge and median-flow estimates to capture general annual and seasonal trends. Because the timing of flow is particularly important to the phenology of many organisms, we also calculated the day-of-year in which half the annual flow was reached. 

For a river network to act as a portfolio of climate and dampen the effects of climate change, expressions of climate and their trends over time need to vary throughout the network (Fig. 2). We fit generalized least squares models with an autoregressive error structure to quantify the change in our flow metrics between 1970 and 2007 for each site. Long-term changes in flow metrics varied substantially across the watershed (Fig. 3). For instance, annual maximum flow decreased in 38 sites but increased in 17 over the last four decades (-28 to 15% change$\cdot$decade^-1^, std. dev. = 6%). Annual median flow showed similar variability but a greater tendency towards rising flow trends with 49 increasing and only six decreasing (-5 to 25% change$\cdot$decade^-1^ std. dev. = 5%). Thus, within the Fraser River basin, there are a variety of long-term trends in flow, suggesting a diversity of climate responses.

We hypothesized that larger catchments within the Fraser River watershed with more diverse climate portfolios would have dampened long-term hydrological change when compared to their smaller sub-catchments. Therefore, to test whether networks dampen climate signals we regressed site-specific trend estimates (e.g., % change$\cdot$decade^-1^) onto each site's catchment area using a generalized least squares model. To quantify attenuation, we modeled the change in trend variability with the change in catchment area using an exponential variance function[@Pinheiro:2006]. The variance function allowed us to predict the range of flow trend values that would be expected as watershed area increased. Decreasing range of flow trends with increasing watershed area would indicate a climate-dampening network effect.

Long-term changes in hydrology were less variable in larger catchments, as predicted, demonstrating between 85 and 92% dampening of flow trends moving from headwater catchments to the network's confluence. In other words, the largest catchments were approximately 10 times more stable in their climate response than the smallest catchments. For instance, trends ranged between a 6% reduction and 19% increase in median flow per decade among small watersheds, while large watersheds ranged between 0.8 and 1.6% change per decade. Similar attenuation was seen in flow timing with a 94% reduction in the day-of-year to half-annual-flow trends such that small watersheds were reaching half their annual flow between 8 days later and 25 days earlier while large watersheds have only shifted 2 to 4 days earlier between 1970 and 2007. 

A null model approach illustrated that support for a river network portfolio effect was greater than 90\% for three of four annual flow trend metrics and as high as 98\% for median-annual-flow trends (Fig. 3). Trend attenuation was 3.1 (0.7--9.1 this and hereafter are 90\% intervals), 1.6 (0.3--4.6), 3.4 (1.0--8.5) and 5.4(1.5--14.6) times greater than the null model for annual-flow timing, and minimum, maximum and median annual-flow respectively. These statistics provide strong support for the hypothesis that river network portfolio effects contribute to climate dampening in large rivers.

Regional flow-trends and attenuation strength varied by season. Analysis of monthly trends revealed that winter flows are getting higher and summer flows are getting lower over time, but that these trends have been more variable in smaller catchments (Fig. 4, Supplementary Figs. S1, S2). For example, winter maximum flows in small catchments ranged from nearly no change to dramatic 44% increases per decade with decreases only as large as 15%. Despite these extreme locations, on average the basin has only experienced moderate winter maximum flow increases of 5-10%. Summer flows exhibited the opposite, with decreases in high flows over time. However, there was weak evidence of attenuation in the spring (Fig. 4, S1, S2). For example, in the spring the likelihood of network-driven attenuation of maximum flow trends was as low as 24% (Fig. 4). The deterioration of the network's attenuation strength was coincident with the spring freshet, when snowmelt drives high flows across the basin. Synchronization events such as the freshet may subvert river network dampening mechanisms by homogenizing the region's response to climate shifts.

Despite considerable dampening relative to smaller sub-basins, the furthest downstream reaches of the Fraser River are still exhibiting small but detectable signals of climate change. Late fall, winter and early spring flows are generally increasing while late spring, summer and early fall flows are decreasing (Fig. 4, Supplementary Figs. S1, S2). These findings generally support previous studies demonstrating earlier spring runoff [@Dery:2012], decreasing summer and fall flows [@Stahl:2006] and increased winter flows [@Healey:2011]. Together, this body of work indicates basin-wide effects of climate change, where shifts in winter precipitation from snow to rain is resulting in increased winter runoff and decreased snow pack contributions to summer flows. Our work suggests that because the basin is responding heterogeneously to the shifting climate and integrating climate trends, the downstream impacts of climate change on flow are greatly reduced. In contrast to previously studied types of climate mitigation where habitats modify climate drivers (e.g., carbon storage) or physically absorb climate change impacts (e.g., mangroves), network climate dampening smooths out extreme climatic trends thereby reducing the impact of local extremes.

Climate change is already causing economic and conservation challenges for river systems worldwide[@Palmer:2009]. For example, sockeye salmon in the Fraser River have seen as much as 80% pre-spawn mortality in years with later run-off and elevated temperatures, leading managers to close the fishery in 2013 and 2015. In the absence of climate dampening the impacts of these temperature extremes could have been dramatically worse. As climate change progresses, river hydrology will continue to shift, further stressing riverine ecosystems and subsequently demanding responsive management. However, river networks provide an underappreciated defense against these climate-change impacts as they are uniquely organized to leverage locally filtered expressions of climate into stability. A simple product of form and gravity, stability emerges as river networks integrate landscape heterogeneity, creating a downstream portfolio of climate that smooths local extremes and tempers long-term flow trends. Therefore, larger rivers should have flow regimes that are less sensitive to local climate trends.

Our study provides insight into the spatial scaling of climate change. We focused on a vast watershed with a remarkably diverse climate portfolio, yet we would still expect that smaller rivers could dampen some degree of climate variability. For instance, based on our data, we predict that rivers draining a catchment of 60,000 km^2^ would have 66% less variability in the rate of change in hydrology than a smaller river draining ~5000 km^2^. While this dampening is less than the 10-fold decrease observed in the entire 220,000 km^2^ Fraser River, smaller watersheds can offer a defense against the impacts of climate change.

There have been extensive efforts to predict the hydrologic sensitivity of rivers due to climate change through downscaled climate projections[@Nijssen:2001]. Here we demonstrate that large rivers may have an inherent ability to absorb local climate change. But just as the destruction of coastal habitats degrades their natural capacity to mitigate sea-level rise or storm events[@Arkema:2013], the management of river basins likely impacts the ability for river networks to attenuate climate trends. For example, dams synchronize the flow regimes of rivers [@Poff:2007] and logging increases the magnitude and frequency of extreme events such as high and low flows through increased runoff rates[@Zhang:2014]. These anthropogenic activities may magnify the impacts of climatic shifts such as the transition from snow- to rain-dominated precipitation in some basins. The climate cost of these watershed activities should be considered in environmental decision making. Climate change is a global challenge; here we suggest large rivers dampen local change by leveraging landscape diversity into a portfolio of climate, an important tool in the climate-mitigation toolbox.

# Methods

**River discharge data.** To assess flow trends within the Fraser River basin we downloaded daily flow data from Environment Canada's HYDAT database. Within HYDAT we selected hydro-metric gauge stations using three criteria: (i) the station was within the Fraser River basin, (ii) the station's flow data were not observed to be dam influenced, and (iii) the station collected data in each month between 1970 and 2007 and no month was missing more than 5 days data. We selected this 38-year range because this period maximized the number of gauge stations in the Fraser River basin (*n*=55) operating concurrently over a long enough time period in which climate trends may be observable. We interpolated missing data using a linear model in log-space, but of the 13,879 days of data only 23 days were estimated. Because dams control flow and stabilize flow trends, we removed sites where daily flow exhibited unusually high autocorrelation and low variability relative to other sites of similar size, and were observed downstream of, and atypically close to, a dam (*n*=3). The downstream distance of gauge stations from dams was determined using GIS spatial layers available in the *BC Data Catalog*, maintained by the provincial government of British Columbia. Finally, we summarized the daily data into annual and monthly maximum, median and minimum flow estimates and the day-of-year to half-annual-flow.

**River discharge trend analysis.** We estimated annual and monthly flow trends for each response variable at each gauge station using a generalized least squares (GLS) model with an AR1 autocorrelation function. To ensure our model estimates and simulations remained within the calendar year we logit transformed our flow-timing response variable (i.e., day-of-year to half-annual-flow) after scaling the data between 0 and 1 (i.e., dividing by 365).

**River discharge trend simulation.** In the observed data, small watersheds exhibited greater variability around their trend estimates than large watersheds. This relationship between watershed size and trend certainty may pull small watershed trend estimates away from zero, thereby creating the appearance of decreasing trend variability among sites as watershed size increases. Using a null-hypothesis framework we simulated time-series for each site with no underlying trend. These simulations were generated by a random walk process with the observed standard deviation and autocorrelation parameters ($\hat{\sigma}$, $\hat{\upvarphi}$) at our sites. Using the same GLS model as applied to the observed data, we estimated trends for 1000 simulated time series at each site for each response variable (e.g., Supplementary Fig. S3). This simulation process created distributions of null-expectations with which we compared our observed results.

**Basin trend attenuation analysis.** To quantify the rate of trend attenuation with increasing watershed area, we regressed site-specific flow trends onto $\sqrt{\mathrm{watershed\ area}}$ using a GLS model that included the exponential variance function $f(\mathrm{area})=\exp(2\updelta\sqrt{\mathrm{area}})$ where $f(\mathrm{area})$ represents the variance for a given watershed area. This analysis was also conducted for each basin-wide simulation resulting in 1 observed variance exponent parameter ($\hat{\updelta}$) and 1000 simulated $\hat{\updelta}$. By comparing our observed attenuation with our basin-wide null-model simulations we addressed the potential that more variable flows in smaller catchments contribute to the observed pattern of flow trends as a function of watershed area (Fig. 3). This null-model approach asks how likely our observation is due to a sampling effect versus a network portfolio effect.

**Dampening summary statistics.** We calculated attenuation certainty as the percentage of simulated $\hat{\updelta}$ that were less than the observed $\hat{\updelta}$. We calculated attenuation strength as the ratio between the standard deviation at the smallest and largest watersheds as defined by the exponential variance function (i.e., $\sqrt{f(\mathrm{area}_1)} / \sqrt{f(\mathrm{area}_2)}$). To compare the degree of attenuation observed with the null-simulated attenuation, we compared this ratio with the same ratio calculated from the null-simulated data (i.e., $\left( \sqrt{f(\mathrm{area}_1)} / \sqrt{f(\mathrm{area}_2)} \right) / \left( \sqrt{f(\mathrm{area}_{\mathrm{null} 1})} / \sqrt{f(\mathrm{area}_{\mathrm{null} 2})} \right)$). Finally, to estimate how the day-of-year to half-annual-flow was changing, we estimated the steepest point of each site's logistic curve and multiplied this slope value by 365 to revert from our 0--1 scale to our original annual range of 0--365. To get a decadal rate we multiplied these results by 3.8 (number of decades in 38 years). We estimated the steepest part of the logistic curve using the *divide by four* rule[@Gelman:2008] (dividing the coefficient by four equals the first derivitive of the logistic curve at its steepest point).

#Acknowledgements
This study could not have been done without the decades of flow data collected by those at Environment Canada. K.A. Chezik and J.W. Moore were supported by the Liber Ero Chair of Coastal Science and Management and Simon Fraser University. S.C. Anderson was supported by the David H. Smith Conservation Research Fellowship. 

#Author contributions
J.W. Moore conceived of the study. K.A. Chezik and S.C. Anderson developed and performed the analyses. K.A. Chezik wrote the paper with contributions from J.W. Moore and S.C. Anderson.

\newpage

#Figure Captions
**Figure 1**|**Flow gauge sites within the Fraser River basin (dark grey) in British Columbia Canada (light grey).** Flow gauge sites (yellow dots) are scaled by the size of the contributing area. The map is projected in Albers BC UTM to provide an equal area depiction of the region.

**Figure 2**|**Annual median flow at 55 sites within the Fraser River basin.** Flow rates are scaled at each site by the root mean square in order to make flow rates comparable among sites. Lines are loess smoothers with a smoothing span of 0.25 predicted each month between 1970 and 2007. Line and point size are scaled to each flow gauge site's watershed area. The data show inter-annual variability within sites with varying magnitudes and directions among sites, illustrating variable long-term change in hydrology across the basin.

**Figure 3**|**Annual flow trend attenuation within the Fraser River basin.** (*Left*) Trend estimates $\pm$ one standard error (SE, grey) plotted against watershed area (km^2^). Blue represents observed attenuation; orange and red represent simulated attenuation that is weaker- and stronger- than observed. (*Right*) Density plots show variance exponents ($\hat{\updelta}$) and the proportion on either side of the observed (blue). Flow metrics include long-term flow-timing shifts (change per decade in day-of-year (DOY) to half annual flow), where decreasing trends suggest more annual flow is occurring earlier in the year (A), and the percent change per decade in minimum (B), maximum (C) and median (D) annual flow. Simulated lines ignore variance in intercept and slope to focus visually on attenuation.

**Figure 4**|**Monthly maximum flow trend attenuation within the Fraser River basin.** (*Left*) Fraser River's basin-wide maximum-flow trend estimates (i.e., intercept=vertical grey lines) by month with density distributions of null-model simulation results. Observed values falling further from the center of the density distribution suggest greater evidence for changes in maximum flow and a greater shift in magnitude. (*Center*) Observed monthly Fraser River maximum-flow variance exponent ($\hat{\updelta}$, blue) and associated density distribution of simulated $\hat{\updelta}$ estimates. Decimal values represent the percent of simulated data exhibiting weaker attenuation (yellow) than observed. (*Right*) Trend estimates $\pm$ one standard error (SE, grey) plotted against watershed area (km^2^) for four seasonally representative months.These reflect months in the prior columns and describe the variation in percent change per decade of maximum flow among sites. Simulated lines ignore variance in intercept and slope to focus visually on attenuation.

**Figure S1**|**Monthly minimum flow trend attenuation within the Fraser River basin.** (*Left*) Fraser River's basin-wide minimum-flow trend estimates (i.e., intercept=vertical grey lines) by month with density distributions of null-model simulation results. Observed values falling further from the center of the density distribution suggest greater evidence for changes in minimum flow and a greater shift in magnitude. (*Center*) Observed monthly Fraser River minimum-flow variance exponent ($\hat{\updelta}$, blue) and associated density distribution of simulated $\hat{\updelta}$ estimates. Decimal values represent the percent of simulated data exhibiting weaker attenuation (yellow) than observed. (*Right*) Trend estimates $\pm$ one standard error (SE, grey) plotted against watershed area (km^2^) for four seasonally representative months.These reflect months in the prior columns and describe the variation in percent change per decade of minimum flow among sites. Simulated lines ignore variance in intercept and slope to focus visually on attenuation.

**Figure S2**|**Monthly median flow trend attenuation within the Fraser River basin.** (*Left*) Fraser River's basin-wide median-flow trend estimates (i.e., intercept=vertical grey lines) by month with density distributions of null-model simulation results. Observed values falling further from the center of the density distribution suggest greater evidence for changes in median flow and a greater shift in magnitude. (*Center*) Observed monthly Fraser River median-flow variance exponent ($\hat{\updelta}$, blue) and associated density distribution of simulated $\hat{\updelta}$ estimates. Decimal values represent the percent of simulated data exhibiting weaker attenuation (yellow) than observed. (*Right*) Trend estimates $\pm$ one standard error (SE, grey) plotted against watershed area (km^2^) for four seasonally representative months.These reflect months in the prior columns and describe the variation in percent change per decade of median flow among sites. Simulated lines ignore variance in intercept and slope to focus visually on attenuation.

**Figure S3**|**Example site specific flow simulations** Annual median-flow simulations (yellow) and observations (blue) for all 55 sites considered in this study found within the Fraser River basin. Simulations at each site were parameterized using the observed data but no trend was imposed. Fifty-five site simulations equate to one basin-wide simulation. Each flow metric was simulated 1000 times basin-wide per response variable. See supplemental figure S4 for resultant basin-wide simulation.

**Figure S4**|**Example flow simulation results** Trend estimates $\pm$SE of simulated null-model data (yellow) and the observed data upon which simulations were based (blue), plotted against watershed area. Curved lines represent the estimated variance function ($\hat{\updelta}$) given the simulated data. This is a single example result of the 1000 null-model simulations produced from the data in supplemental figure S3.

\newpage

## References 
